---
layout: default
---

> **WARNING: This page is still in-progress, its contents may change based on the latest Fractal developments.**

This page describes the main concepts introduced with the new Fractal version (version 2 of the `fractal-server` backend).

## The Fractal image list

While executing a processing workflow, Fractal keeps track of all the OME-Zarr images it is processing in the **image list** of a given dataset.
Each entry of this list (which corresponds to a specific OME-Zarr image) is defined by a unique `zarr_url` property (the full path to the zarr_image), and it may also include image types and image attributes.

**Image types** are boolean properties that allow to split the image list into different parts (e.g. 2D vs. 3D with the `is_3D` type, illumination_corrected True vs False if illumination correction was not run in-place). Types can be set both by the task manifest (e.g. after an MIP task, the resulting images always have the type `is_3D`=False - see task-manifest section below FIXME LINK) as well as from within an individual task (see task-API/output section below FIXME LINK).

**Image attributes** are scalar properties (strings, integers, floats or booleans). They are always defined from within individual tasks, and never by the task manifest. They allow selecting subsets of your data (e.g. select a given well, a given plate or a given multiplexing acquisition).

Fractal server uses the image list combined with filters (see below) to provide the right zarr_urls to tasks.

Image-list examples:

* If one has an OME-Zarr HCS plate with 3 wells that contain an image each, the image list has 3 entries for those 3 images. Each image has attributes for plate & well, as well as a type `is_3D` (true or false).
* If one has an OME-Zarr HCS plate with 3 wells and each well has 3 multiplexing acquisition, there are 9 OME-Zarr images present. Therefore, the image list has 9 entries and those entries should have the acquisition attribute set.

FIXME: insert fractal-web screenshot here?

## Filters

Before running a given task, Fractal prepares an appropriate image list by extracting the images that match with a given set of filters (that is, a set of specific values assigned to image types and/or image attributes). Filters can be defined for a dataset and/or for a workflow task. If a specific filter is set both for the dataset and for the workflow task, the workflow-task one takes priority.

### Dataset filter

Examples:
* My dataset currently has the type filter `{"is_3D": False}`, because I previously ran an MIP task, and now tasks in the workflow will run on 2D-projected images (unless specifically required).
* My dataset currently has the attribute filter `{"well": "B03"}`, because I manually added that filter to the dataset (I just want to process a single well for the time being).
* My dataset currently has the filter for attribute `{"acquisition": 1}` set, because I manually added that filter to the dataset (I just want to process a single multiplexing acquisition).

There are multiple ways a dataset may have a given filter set:

1. I manually set it, by modifying the dataset `filters` property.
2. In a given task entry in the manifest, I include the `output_types` attribute. These types, if set, are automatically included in the dataset filters after the task is run. Examples:
    * An MIP task would have `output_types = {"is_3D": False}` (=> from this task onwards, the 2D data is processed, not the raw 3D data).
    * An illumination-correction task would have `output_types = {"illumination_corrected": True}` (=> from this task onwards, the registered data is processed, not the raw data).
4. Within the task output, I can include a `filters` property, for either image attributes and/or types.

### Workflow-task filters

I can manually set an additional input filter by modifying the workflow-task `input_filters` property. For example, I can run a workflow that creates an MIP, but in a later task switch the filter to `{"is_3D": True}` (=> from this task onwards, the 3D data is processed, not the 2D MIP data).

### Additional validation

Task manifest may also specify the `input_types` of a given task. These are not used as filters, but they are used to validate that the filtered image list is valid. If some images of the list do not comply with `input_types`, the Fractal runner raises an error.

Examples:
The illumination-correction task has `input_types={"illumination_corrected": False}`, which means it cannot run on images with type `illumination_correction=True`.
The Apply Registration to Image task has `input_types={"registered": False}`, and therefore it cannot run on images with type `registered=True`.

FIXME: Seeing applied filters during workflow submission & editing filters during submission - TBD

# Fractal tasks

Fractal 2.0 brings a big refactor to the task architecture to make tasks more flexible and allow for building more complex workflows, while also simplifying the task API. This page is meant to give an overview over the different types of Fractal tasks, their input and output API and the elements that go into the Fractal task list. It also highlights some of the uses of the new Image List, where each OME-Zarr image can have types and attributes. The new Image List supports flexible filters set both in the task manifest as well as in Fractal workflows.
Task Types


There are 3 types of tasks in Fractal V2: parallel tasks, non-parallel tasks & compound tasks.

1. Parallel tasks: Task is written to process a single OME-Zarr image and meant to be run in parallel across many OME-Zarr images. A typical scenario for compute tasks that don’t need special input handling or subset parallelization
2. Non-parallel tasks: Task that processes a list of images. Only runs as a single job. Useful to handle image-list updates and validation of Zarr collections (like Import OME-Zarr)
3. Compound tasks: New Task type that runs a non-parallel task first, which provides a custom parallelization list to a parallel compute task. An example are registration tasks that need to run across multiple Zarr images, but parallelize over wells of a multi-well plate. The init task is like a non-parallel task, but provides the parallelization list as output. The compute task is like a parallel task, but it takes an extra init_args dictionary as input from the init task.

## Input API

### Parallel tasks:

Fractal parallel tasks take a single string `zarr_url` as input. The `zarr_url` contains the full path to the zarr file to be processed. We currently just support paths on filesystems, not S3 urls.
`zarr_url` is a reserved keyword argument: when running tasks through Fractal server, the server takes care to pass the correct `zarr_url` value to the parallel task (based on filtering the image list) .
Tasks can also take an arbitrary list of additional arguments that are specific to the task function and that the user can set.

### Non-parallel tasks:

Fractal non-parallel tasks take a list of strings called `zarr_urls` and a string `zarr_dir` as input. `zarr_urls` contains the full paths to the zarr files to be processed and it is a. We currently just support paths on filesystems, not S3 urls. `zarr_dir` is typically the base directory into which Zarr files will be written by tasks and is mostly used by converters.
Both `zarr_urls` and `zarr_dir` are reserved keyword arguments: when running tasks through Fractal server, the server takes care to pass the correct filtered list `zarr_urls` and the correct `zarr_dir` to the non-parallel task.
Tasks can also take an arbitrary list of additional arguments that are specific to the task function and that the user can set.

### Compound tasks

Compound tasks consist of an init part (similar to the non-parallel task) and a compute part (similar to the parallel task).
The init part has the same Input API as the non-parallel task (`zarr_urls` and `zarr_dir`), but provides the parallelization list for the compute part as an output.
The compute part takes `zarr_url` and an extra `init_args` dictionary input argument (which is coming from the parallelization_list).

## Output API
Tasks can optionally return updates to the image list (all tasks except the init phase of a Compound task) or a parallelization list (just the init phase of a compound task). The output of a task is always a task_output dictionary.

Tasks that create new images or edit relevant image properties need to provide an image_list_updates list of dictionaries as part of the task_output so the server can update its metadata about that image.

Task_outputs with image list updates are returned as a dictionary that contains the key `image_list_updates` and a list containing the updates to individual images. The updates need to be for unique zarr_urls and each update needs to contain the `zarr_url` of the image it’s providing an update for. Additionally, they can provide an origin key, an attributes key and a types key.
The `origin` key describes the `zarr_url` of another image already in the image list and will take the existing attributes and types from that image.
Attributes and types can also be directly set by a task.

Here’s an example of its structure:
```python
{
	"image_list_updates" = [
		{
			"zarr_url": "/path/to/my_zarr.zarr/B/03/0_processed",
			"origin": "/path/to/origin_zarr.zarr/B/03/0",
			"attributes": {
				"plate": "plate_name",
				"well": "B03"
			},
			"types": {
				"is_3D": True
			}
		}
	]
}
```

Parallelization lists provide the zarr_urls, as well as additional arbitrary arguments as an init_args dictionary. Parallelization lists are provided in the following structure:
FIXME: format code
{
"parallelization_list" = [
	{
"zarr_url": "/path/to/my_zarr.zarr/B/03/0",
"init_args": {
	"arbitrary_arg": "value"
}
}
]
}


## Fractal Task List (=> Manifest)
A package that provides Fractal tasks needs to contain a manifest that describes these tasks.
Fractal-tasks-core and fractal-tasks-template offer a simplified way to generate this manifest, based on a task list written in Python.
For instance if the task package `my-pkg` is based on the template, the task list is in `src/my-pkg/dev/task_list.py` and includes entries like
```
TASK_LIST = [
	NonParallelTask(
    	name="My non-parallel task",
    	executable="my_non_parallel_task.py",
    	meta={"cpus_per_task": 1, "mem": 4000},
	),
	ParallelTask(
    	name="My parallel task",
    	executable="my_parallel_task.py",
    	meta={"cpus_per_task": 1, "mem": 4000},
	),
	CompoundTask(
    	name="My compound task",
    	executable_init="my_task_init.py",
    	executable="my_actual_task.py",
    	meta_init={"cpus_per_task": 1, "mem": 4000},
    	meta={"cpus_per_task": 2, "mem": 12000},
	),
]
```
where the different task models refer to the different task types (see above). Given such task list, running the following command
``
python src/my-pkg/dev/create_manifest.py
```
generates a JSON file with the up-to-date manifest. Note that advanced usage may require a small customization of the create-manifest script.

More on this can be found e.g. at https://github.com/fractal-analytics-platform/fractal-tasks-template/blob/main/project/README.md.jinja (in progress).

